$Id$

Embed the skiplist nodes inside the row definitions, one for each field
that has an index.

Embed the corresponding skiplist tables inside each table instance.
(When generating code, interpret the per-field key-value array to place
the skiplist nodes into the row definitions.)

Extend the field-defining commands to support saying if something is
indexed and/or unique by making it take key-value pairs.

When generating sets, if a field that is indexed is changed (and therefore
is not new), we have to locate the row by searching the index, delete/remove 
the node and create a new one.

If it's a new insert, we have to create any skiplist nodes and insert
them into the skiplist.


Are we going to support non-unique keys?  We don't have to.  If you wanted
to store customers and their macs, the key could be, like,
8178394534578/2f:3a:aa:22:98

And you'd do an anchored match on 817839534578/*...

Because otherwise when you do a set how do we know if you are creating a
new row or not.

OK that doesn't mean you can't have indexes with duplicate entries, just that
it's a bad idea to insert into them without further qualifiers / search.

querying them is fine.

----

arguments in favor of having the skip lists not be super tied into the
data structures:

    I'm already moving away from custom data structures and routines and
    have more standardized code that uses void * and stuff like that.
    It points to ctables actually generating very little custom code.

    perhaps not every instance of a table do you want to have indexes

    perhaps there would be an efficient way to add an index even after
    the table had a lot of data in it.

    perhaps you would want to delete and index, reindex, etc.

    BUT - if you have dynamic indexes you need a super efficient way for
    set, search, get, etc, to know if they're there or not and use them.


How about if it we had a trigger mechanism on set and read_tabsep and
read_from_postgres where if the field has a trigger on it, the trigger
fires and that trigger can, fr'instance, insert or update an index.

And on delete, too.


----

OK

we're going to create a general field structure that contains, eventually
at least, the field name, type, whether it needs quoting, and other relevant
stuff.  

Also in there, a skip pointer or NULL

and other stuff.

----

OK at this point (12/2/06), I've 

    o written a compare routine generator that,
      for each field, generates a compare routine for that field between two
      specified rows.

    o Gotten some skip list code to compile as part of the build.

    o Created an array of pointers to skip lists in the per-table structure,
      one for each field, which is NULL if no skip list has been created.

    o Added an "index" method to table objects that takes a subcommand
      of "create", "drop", and "dump", so you can say stuff like

          $table index create altitude

      (I know you about for sure want to inherit index attributes that are
       defined when the table creator is defined (ctable) -- the idea
       here is to get it working reliably without messing with how we
       traverse tables currently.)

    o You can create an index on a table and dump it and it works.

What's missing that would make a difference is 

    o having "set" and "read_tabsep" et al update the indexes of rows that 
      are modified.  Currently that's not happening and of course it's 
      unusable until it is.

    o have searches use the indexes.  the way i'm thinking is that only in the
      first search term is it useful to use an index because to merge index
      results we'd have to do a bitmap of picked records or something like
      that.  Maybe someday, but we're getting a lot with this already and
      we're happy with this, at least for now.


Oh yeah, since I have to update a row's field's skiplist entry when an
indexed field has changed, it points to having a trigger mechanism.

Also Peter's not that interested in analog points at this point but you
could specify a deadband when defining most or all numeric field types and
ctable could trigger when new values set into a field don't trigger the
tigger unless the value deviates by more than the deadband since the last
time a trigger was caused by this.  That would be pretty cool.

Of course if there was a super simple way to get Tcl code to execute as
almost a freebie when implementing the triggers, so much the better.

-----

OK now at 12/4/06 we have

    o duplicate key detection upon insert into an index (even though we
      want to have duplicates allowable on a per index basis.)

    o "set" and "read_tabsep" and "read_postgres_reset" and "set_null"
      now update the indexes of rows that are modified.

I'm now working on having searches use the indexes.

When the first compare is against an indexed field, somehow we do what
we do walking the hashtable only we don't walk to the hash table.

In fact, as soon as there is any index we will prefer to walk the skip lists's
index rather than use the hash table.

I'm adding "range" as a new search compare option.

I don't even need a "range" option.

If the first term of the search is something that can be done on an index,
we skip however much we can zoom past before the search term starts returning true.  The second search term would terminate the search.

Hmm, no it wouldn't, as it stands.

OK, range is back on.

When range is the compare term and it's the first compare term and the
field also happens to be an index, we want to generate the search loop
from the interpretation of this term against the index and apply the
remaining compare expressions against what the loop generates interpreting
the first one.

Argh I've also come across the need to be able to set fields without triggering
index updates.

I also need to rationalize the field compare routines that I make for
skip list lookups versus the more complicated search compare routines
and also differing from the sort compare routines, ones also that could
be fixed up.

I toy with generating per-field set routines and that seems pretty cool, but then I need the field number to see if I need to update an index or whatever.

----

12/5/06  

It's working.

----

12/6/06

We're currently only supporting indexes with unique keys -- no duplicates are
allowed.

We need to also allow indexes with duplicate keys.

As it stands skip lists do not generate anything into the generated
row structures.  This was a design decision to keep ctables fully working,
minimizing the impact of skip list indexes while they were being developed.

It turned out to buy us more than we thought, too, because we discovered how
much faster hash tables are to generate than skip lists.  That we kept hash
tables for accessing a row via its primary, unique key appears to be a
significant win.  How we do this will likely be revisited more several times.

Currently without allowing duplicates, nothing is done to the row structure
at all and each row has a corresponding skip list entry.  When a value in
an indexed field of a row changes, we search the skip list for the existing
value, delete it, and insert the skip list with the new value.

Note that searching is required to locate a skip list entry for deletion as
normally implemented.

Although skip lists can support duplicate entries, there's a stack-like
behavior for inserts, and for deletes it will delete the newest entry added.
Obviously this isn't good enough for us, where we want to be able to delete
any row's index, etc.

So the plan is that we'll have only one skip list node for a value regardless
of how many rows have that value in that field.

If all of the rows having the same value were somehow linked by a linked list,
that would work, although you'd have to search both the skip list space and
probe the linked list upon insertion, modification of the field value, and 
row deletion.

(Skip lists themselves could be implemented using bidirectionally linked lists,
but we're not going to go into that.)

So far we have not required changes to the row structures being emitted and we
do our skip list thing at runtime.

Also we want to over time be able to use ctables to generate tables where
you have the option of not supporting null values (and the code for managing
that not getting generated), declaring that a table will never have indexes
or that certain fields will not support indexes.  That way if you don't need
that stuff you get very fast, very minimal code.

OK.

Now, as to skip lists and linked lists of duplicate entries, if the lists were
bidirectionally linked and there was a straight-ahead way to get from a row
to the linked list, removing a row's field from an index would simply be a 
matter of removing its entry from the doubly linked list.

If you wanted to, upon removing the last element, you could remove the skip
list node as well.  However, it would also be possible to leave the skip
list node there with no items in its doubly linked list of items and then,
the next time an item was added with that key, simply link it in...
A index vacuum operation could be made available to make a pass trhough the
index and delete index nodes that have no rows linked from them.

This would require at least a pointer to be added to the row that pointed to
some kind of structure through which one accessed the bidirectionally linked
list nodes for each indexed element of the row.

Possibly this would be a pointer to an array of pointers, one for each field
that can possibly have an index defined, and then those pointers either point
to a doubly linked node structure or are themselves that structure.

We'll use the freely redistributable queue.h from Berkeley, which is released
under the Berkeley copyright.

Each node in a skip list that allows duplicates (and possibly all of them
since we don't want a lot of special-casing) will have a doubly linked
list head structure initially set to empty.

Insertion will do a find on the skip list.  If the element is not found,
a new skip list node is created with an empty list inside it.  At this
point, we've either found a matching node or created one, now we add this
row to the list.

It's probably reasonable to put the newest row with a duplicate entry in the
field we're indexing at the front of the duplicate linked list as it's more
likely to get pulled up.

In fact, after a lookup of a row in the index, it would probably be a win
to move that row to the front of the duplicate list, if there are duplicates
on its field value, as it's semi-likely that the row will be re-requested in 
short order.

Walks (searches) would not move rows around within their duplicate element
list.

At the very least, rows of tables that allow indexes will need a pointer to
an "index row" structure that will, one way or another, provide access to
the doubly linked list pointers for all of the fields that are indexed.
I'm thinking it'll be a pointer to an array of pointers.

This could get nasty pretty quickly in terms of needing a lot of memory that
it didn't use.

I'd also like to not constantly check in "set" to see if a field is indexed.
Unless it's been explicitly declared indexable or something, maybe don't
generate any of that code.

Also with nulls, I'd like to be able to say a table is not to support
out-of-band nulls and get super-clean code, as mentioned above and
probably elsewhere.

If we were to have some rows marked not indexable we'd have to give up
having an array of pointers corresponding to the fields for the skip
list heads, or not, but certainly we'd like to save the space on a row-by-row
basis by not creating lots of pointers that we'd know we didn't need.

We could choose at this point to make naming fields indexable required and
generate the linked list nodes directly into the table.

But that's also kind of a pain and if we did that we have to have it indirect
in some way that there's still very little custom-generated code and it's
invisible to us through calls that we're making to do things.

Actually we only need the linked list nodes if the index allows duplicates,
provided we are willing to take the hit to implement unique and duplicate-
allowing indexes differently, hopefully in a way that hides the differences
from as much of the code as possible.

Since our existing implementation (12/6/06) *only* supports unique indexes,
if we maintain that support while adding support for non-unique indexes,
we'll have both, saving a lot of linked list headers and the like.

I'm not sure how important that is.  However I like the idea of getting 
basically as fast a ctable as possible for the feature set requested.

At the very least, though, with support for nonunique indexes, we will need
a pointer in the row to get to the per-indexed-row index data.

Is it crazy to go crazy trying to optimize this?  Many or most tables will have
no indexes, a few, one.  Fewer still will have two or more.

How 'bout this, even more to the point?  We super need this capability in
short order for production purposes.

What's the *quickest* way we can get support for these things?

Have it separate, with lots of mallocs and pointers between things?

Are you answering my question or asking me a question?

Both?

Well, we figure now that the skip lists are interesting and useful enough on
their own that there should be skip lists for Tcl that have Tcl objects as
the (keys and) elements rather than requiring a ctable to be on the end of
it, perhaps if we keep these linked list things general they'll turn up
useful elsewhere as well...  Named linked lists of Tcl objects anyone?

How about having a pointer in the row for each field that's indexable
nonunique?  It points to an index linked list node structure if that
field is indexed?

So currently the choices are:

    o hard-code linked list nodes (forward and backward pointers) into rows

    o have a single link from rows to a structure containing linked list
      nodes for each indexable/indexed field in the row

    o have a link for each indexable field from the row to a single 
      linked list node structure for that field.

Peter said something last night that I thought was kind of dumb at the time
and dismissed it but he was suggesting a fixed number of linked list nodes
defined in the row and then use them like that.

Actually I think having linked list nodes in the rows is pretty powerful.
It's a very natural way that you'd be linking structures if you were hand-
coding something like this for a specific structure in C.

To look at it from another direction, there could be a lot of other interesting
uses for linked lists in rows, perhaps specific to peoples' applications where
they're willing to go hybrid and use Tcl or some other language through the
API *and* code some stuff to interact with ctables directly in C.

Also if all rows were in one doubly linked list, that would provide us with
faster traversal than even hash walking can provide.

(few minutes later)

OK I'm generating list entries into the row definitions.  Currently an
array, as in:

    LIST_ENTRY(nameTable)  _ll[3];


This needs to be definable on a per-table basis, how many you get, or something.

Whether we're going to have named ones, like per field that can have this,
or whatever, from the internal API level, I can't know any table-specific
details about this stuff in ctable_search.c, etc.

Thus I need, having a ctable pointer and a row pointer, to be able to callout
via the creator table function pointers to:

    o find out stuff about linked lists

    o remove the row from a linked list

    o add the row to a linked list

If there isn't a 1:1 relationship between these and fields, there has to
be some way to translate between a field number and the linked list that
takes care of it.

Yes.

So you'd say in the call, something like

    ctable->creatorTable->remove_from_field_list (interp, ctable, row, field);

    and/or

    ctable->creatorTable->remove_from_list (interp, ctable, row, linkedListIndex);

You'd also have

    ctable->creatorTable->insert_into_list (interp, ctable, listHead, row, linkedListIndex);

    ctable->creatorTable->insert_into_field_list (interp, ctable, listHead, row, field);

Through a mechanism, the field is used to identify both which skip list
(yeah it already does that) *and* which linked list to use for duplicate
insert.

----

12/7/06

I've been staring at it and using cc -E foo.c to see what the C preprocessor
is putting out in interpreting those #defines making up the list primitives.

It's clear now that the path is that we generate the linked list node
structures into the ctable structure, as I was converging on yesterday.

There will be an array of them in the row, one for each indexable (possibly
only if nonunique) row, one for every row (at least for an experiment in
seeing how much faster brute force is if we bypass the hashtable walk),
and maybe allowing extra ones to be added for the developer's own purposes.

Gotta watch that, however, as the management of rows with indexes is rigorous,
and if you start pulling rows out of tables without going through the API
to cause the indexes to be removed, the ctables will become corrupted and
a protection violation is likely.

gentable.tcl will be modified to generate code to perform list operations
against the defined lists using list index numbers and generic list
header pointers.

the ctable structure in ctable.h will be modified to include a pointer to
an array of list header pointers.

ctable creation code will be modified to initialize a pointer to the
generated function to allow rows to be queued and dequeued to and from
these lists, walked, etc.

Rather than having to generate custom code for managing the skip lists and
maintaining pointers to it, we could, instead of using void *, use a
data structure that overlays the real row kind of like with Tcl_Interp
having a detailed internal representation and a limited external 
representation.

Then none of the table-specific generated code needs to know how to specifically
do these mundane insert operations and stuff.

The only requirement is that the array of list nodes be at the front in both
cases.

If I didn't mention this, I need a way to translate between a field number and
an index number.

I'm also going to make the first element of the row structure always
be a pointer to the hash table entry corresponding.  As long as we still
have hash tables and we're more looking just at rows with the skip list
stuff, we'll need to be able to find hash table entries from rows.

Also you can't have those flexible arrays in a structure without something
solid in front of them.  I don't see why, really.  In this case I have some
real defined number in the structure I'm aliasing over.

----

12/13/06

I've run into a snag implementing allowing duplicate values in an index,
involving deletion.

Currently I'm using bidirectionally linked lists with code evolved from
BSD queue.h

But when I remove the last entry from a skip list node's linked list,
the skip list node can no longer be compared during a search as the compare 
compares values in the rows and there are now no rows on one of the skip 
list's nodes.

So I'm going to have to do something like mark rows deleted (you can't
reuse them very easily if there are multiple indexes).  Actually that's
not enough because let's say one field that's indexed changes in a row.
We need to move that row from one skip list node to another in that
index but the other indexes it may be set up for are unchanged.

Or detect if it's a removal of the last row from a skip list node and, if
so, search for that skip list entry and remove it.

That seems pretty easy as long as we have a good way to tell if we're the
last node.  Something like our next pointer will be NULL our prev pointer
we'll somehow be able to tell we're the last one.  Ugh.  I do not want to
have pointers in every row for each indexed field back to the skip list
node.

If when a field was defined indexed we dispensed with the "index create foo"
business, like it was automatically created at table instantiation and
managed thenceforth, then we could conceivably keep the comparison value
in the skip list node rather than the row itself.  This would be a decent
win if there were a lot of duplicates, particularly for strings.

I've also been toying with the idea of creating bins of sorts, like rather than indexing every floating point value, you'd have bins that stuff would go into, 
i.e. some kind of range that you'd consider stuff within the range to be
a duplicate of sorts, so for instance you might have a name and just bin
the first two characters then have sequential lookup beneath that.

It would be pretty quick and simple to have a pointer to the node in each
row's index.

If the linked list routines weren't trying to be so clever with the prev
pointer being a pointer to the address of the previous node's (or header's)
next pointer, we'd be able to know from inspection of our own row whether
we were the only node or not.

---

How I ended up doing it, there's only one entry made into the skip list and
a bidirecitonal linked list is used for the duplicates.  Each row has a
pointer to its skip list header.  We could rewrite the linked list routines
to get rid of that.

When deleting the last row of a skip list node, we delete the skip list node.

